\pdfbookmark[1]{Abstract}{Abstract} % Bookmark name visible in a PDF viewer

\begingroup
\let\clearpage\relax
\let\cleardoublepage\relax
\let\cleardoublepage\relax

\chapter*{Abstract} % Abstract name

How does the brain make use of information encoded in its circuits
through development and learning? The sensory cortex has been known to
extract low level features of its visual environment through
developmental and activity-dependent processes. Various computational
and theoretical models exist describing a wide range of phenomena
observed in the primary visual cortex (V1) ranging from the
development of orientation tuning, anatomical organization of its
circuits, surround modulation and higher level effects like
attention. However so far no model has been able to bridge these
levels of description.

In this thesis we integrate the information gleaned about cortical
development, circuit and cell-type specific interactions, anatomical
measurements as well as behavioural and electrophysiological
measurements to develop a computational model of V1 that is better
constrained and can make predictions about each of these levels of
evidence. Through a series of models, which incorporate increasing
levels of biophysical detail, becoming increasingly better
constrained, we make detailed predictions on the types of interactions
required for robust development of cortical maps, anatomical
organization and computations performed by the primary visual
cortex. This also allows us to highlight wher.

Initial models will demonstrate how anatomical and
electrophysiological knowledge can be combined to give a unified
account of spatial tuning of the primary visual cortex. As a second
step we will investigate the known interactions between different
excitatory and inhibitory cell classes in V1 and what role each cell
type may play during development. Finally, we demonstrate how various
cell classes can interact to give rise to not only robust development
but also the development of realistic lateral connectivity patterns,
reflecting the statistics of the visual environment the model was
trained on. This allows us to explore how the model is able to capture
higher-order information about the environment and use that
information to optimize neural coding and aid the processing of even
complex visual tasks.

\endgroup
